---
layout: post
title: Vim grep operator
date: 2020-05-09 01:00:00 +0300
description: Search for current word in multiple files # Add post description (optional)
img: vimgrep.gif # Add image post (optional)
tags: [vim, ack, grep, searching, vimtip] # add tag
---
#Every developer needs a fast way to search for a current word in multiple files.

As a [vim](https://github.com/vim){:target="_blank"} user the way i used to do it would be in the form of ``` :Ack! < word > < directory_where_i_want_to_search > ``` . Surely there must be a better way!

That way was presented to me by my vim partner in crime, Mr João Seabra. He wrote a small [vim function](https://learnvimscriptthehardway.stevelosh.com/chapters/23.html){:target="_blank"} which i find particularly useful for my daily workflow.

```
function! s:GrepOperator()

    let wordUnderCursor = expand("<cword>")
    silent execute "Ack! " . shellescape(wordUnderCursor) . " " . g:var_default
    copen
    redraw!

endfunction
```

Let's understand how it works:

> ```let wordUnderCursor = expand("<cword>")```
**
  we start by declaring a variable which will hold the word under cursor**

> ```
    silent execute "Ack! " . shellescape(wordUnderCursor) . " " . g:var_default
```
 **we execute the shell command silently (in my case i like to use a code searching tool similar to ack called the_silver_searcher) providing the wordUnderCursor and the directory where we want where we want to search (which is stored in a global variable var_default)**

> ``` copen ``` **we open the quickfix window**

> ``` redraw! ``` **we force a screen refresh**

Note that you could any grep-like tool you prefer instead of **Ack**.
I also recomend reading **help cword** to get more options. For my vimrc, I needed **cWORD** to grab the whitespace delimited text under the cursor.

##How do you fill the global variable with the directory to search in?

In my case i find it useful to set it to the **current working directory**. That can be achieved by setting in your vimrc the following line:

> ```
let g:var_default = getcwd()
```

##Now how do we call the function quickly?

for that we need a mapping!  That is achieved with the following lines:

> ```
vnoremap <leader>z :<c-u>call <SID>GrepOperator()<cr>
noremap <leader>z :<c-u>call <SID>GrepOperator()<cr>
```

with these lines i can call the vim function in normal and visual mode. In my case, you can see that i map it for <leader> z.

To wrap it up, a fast way to navigate the result documents can be done with the following mappings:

> ```
nnoremap <leader>j :cnext<CR>
nnoremap <leader>k :cprevious<CR>
```

using <leader>j , i navigate to the next result
using <leader>k , i navigate to the previous result


##And that's it! Now we have a quick and practical way of searching words in vim!

##Do you have a different/better way of achieving the same result? i would love to hear about it :)


This blog was originally posted on [Medium](https://mediumpostthat i didnt wrote yet){:target="_blank"}--be sure to follow and clap!
